In this video,
we're going to look
at Excel's hierarchy charts.
Hierarchy charts are
an excellent visualization
for representing
hierarchical data or data that's
been subdivided
into subcategories.
So for example, with
Rowan's greenhouse
gas emission data,
he's actually divided it into
the top 10 countries and
the other countries.
He wants to be able
to see proportionally
how many emissions come from
just the top 10 emitters.
He's then divided the top 10
into the countries themselves,
and within each country,
the sectors that are
producing the most emissions.
This is what we call
hierarchical data,
and we now have two
stunning chart types
for representing this data.
Before we create them, it
is quite important that
your data is
structured correctly.
So you must have your main
category in your first column,
your next category in
the second column, etc.
The last column must
contain a numeric value.
Now, if I scroll down to
my other countries,
my non-top 10,
you'll see these
have not been broken
down by sector, and that's fine.
You don't need the same number
of subcategories in each case,
but you must make sure again that
the numeric data ends
up in that last column.
Our data's all good.
Let's now create our chart.
So clicking anywhere in the data,
we're going to come
to our Insert tab.
In the Charts group,
we're going to come to the
Insert Hierarchy Chart icon,
and click the drop-down.
Two to choose from,
the first one we're
going to go for is the sunburst.
So select "Sunburst"
and then let's
make this nice and big
because we've got
quite a lot of data.
There's our visually
stunning sunburst chart.
Very easy to understand.
The innermost ring shows us
the breakdown of top 10
versus the other countries.
Then the next ring is
the actual top 10
countries themselves,
and finally, the
individual sectors.
Let's make a few
changes to this chart.
So I'm going to come to the green
plus to get my chart elements,
and I'm going to
untick "Chart Title".
Instead, I'm going to use
the shape that I created earlier,
so I'm going to click on it,
"Control X" to cut,
click into my chart, and
"Control V" to paste.
I'm just going to position that
somewhere near the middle,
and you can resize it
slightly if you need to.
You'll notice the data
labels automatically
display where they will fit.
If we make them slightly smaller,
we can fit a few more labels.
So I'm going to click on
to one of my data labels,
come up to my "Home" tab,
and I'm going to change
the size to seven.
I'm just going to click
in the box and type
seven and press "Enter".
They're still readable, but
I can now fit a few more.
The other change I could
make which will help
visibility is the borders.
The lines here are very thick.
So to change that,
we're going to click
somewhere into the chart.
I'm then going to right-click
and choose "Format Data Series".
This will open my
panel on the right,
and I'm going to
click into my "Paint
Bucket" and come
down to "Border".
What we want to
change is our width.
If you click the drop-down,
it will actually go
straight to zero,
which is a little smaller
than I had in mind.
So we're going to change that
to 0.2 and press "Enter".
If you click away for a moment,
you'll see we get much thin
and more elegant lines.
Now, because we only
had the two series,
we've only got two colors,
and I'd like a little more,
which again is easy to do.
So I'm going to start, again,
by clicking into my series
and then I'm going to click on to
"Other" to highlight
just the other series.
Then I'm going to come
to my color fill;
I'm going to make that
a nice light gray.
Then click into your top 10.
We're going to make this
a slightly darker gray.
Now, what I'd like to do is give
my top five emitters
each their own color.
So I'm going to start
by clicking into
"China", and I'll make that blue.
Then I'm going to
repeat that process for
my other four top emitters.
There is our completed
Sunburst chart.
Let's now have a look at
how we create a tree-map.
So we're going to click into
the next tab in our chart.
You'll see this data
is very similar,
except we only have
the two categories.
Also notice, with the
primary category,
that it actually has been
repeated. Now, that's fine.
It will work really nicely,
but here we have to be a little
careful about our sort order.
It's really important that
the data is sorted
by main category.
In other words, if I came into
"Country" and I resorted my data,
that is not going to work.
So just make sure that you
are sorted by main category.
I'm going to undo that change.
Now, with your data selected,
so you can just be clicked in it,
we're going to come
into our Insert tab.
We're going to come to Charts,
and this time we're going
to choose "Treemap".
Again, let's make
that nice and big.
So tree-map, very similar
concept to our sunburst.
You can clearly see the
breakdown showing which of
our regions are emitting
the most and which
countries within
those regions make
up those emissions.
So for example, Africa is
producing comparatively
little in the way of CO_2.
But South Africa on its
own is probably making
up for about a third of
those total emissions.
Now, we can easily
add some formatting
to this chart as well.
This time, I'm going to come
to my Chart Design ribbon.
Let's add some styling.
So I'm just going to
select "Style 7",
which gives me a bit
of a gradient color.
To change the colors, we have
our five series this time,
so we don't need
to get as manual.
We can just come to our
Change Color option
and choose another color set.
Finally, we should give
this a proper chart title.
So I'm going to click into
my chart title and then
"Control A" to select all,
and I'm going to type CO_2
emissions by country 2017.
But you'll notice the two
doesn't look quite right.
That really should
be a subscript,
and you can do it in Excel;
it's just a little
harder to find.
So I'm going to
highlight just the two.
I'm going to come to my Home tab.
At the bottom corner
of the Font group,
you can open your Font Settings.
The keyboard shortcut
is "Control 1".
We're going to choose
"Subscript" and then say "Okay",
and that's looking great.
So two chart types we've
looked at for representing
hierarchical data are
sunburst and our tree-map.
These chart types are
only available in
Excel 2016 and later.
But in this week's
practice challenge,
we're going to show you an
alternative method for creating
a hierarchy chart using
Excel's doughnut chart.